README.md, before:

# sparkify-redshift-etl 
## Project Overview
This is the third project in the 
[Udacity Data Engineer Nanodegree](https://www.udacity.com/course/data-engineer-nanodegree--nd027).

The virtual startup 'Sparkify' provides a music streaming service. In this
 project we imagine that Sparkify has grown and we are shifting to using cloud 
 services for our data warehousing needs. 

Here we create an ETL pipeline that extracts JSON log data of user activity
 & song metadata from s3 buckets and stage them on Redshift, transforming the data
into a star-schema to optimize queries that have been specified by the analytics team. 

We also support Sparkify's IaC scalability goals by automating the ETL pipeline
infrastructure management using the 
[AWS Python SDK (Boto3)](https://boto3.amazonaws.com/v1/documentation/api/latest/index.html).

## How to Run
1. Clone this repository and install the requirements.
```
$ pip3 install -r requirements.txt
```

2. You will need an AWS user with rights to create IAM roles and Redshift
 clusters. Export your AWS Account credentials as environment variables in
 your terminal window:

```
$ export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<YOUR_AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID>
$ export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<YOUR_AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID>
```

3. **OPTIONAL:** Run the Redshift setup script to create the necessary IAM 
role, permissions, Redshift cluster if you do not already have those set up
. You can adjust the configuration details (e.g. AWS region, DB credentials) by
 editing `dwh_config.json` before running the setup script. 
 
```
$ python3 setup_redshift.py
```

4. Run the ETL scripts to load the data into the Redshift Cluster
```
python3 create_tables.py
python3 etl.py
```

5. **OPTIONAL:** Run the teardown script to clean up your AWS resources
```
$ python3 cleanup_redshift.py
```

## DB Schema Design
![Sparkify DB Schema](images/sparkify_db.png?raw=true "Sparkify DB Schema")
_Image created with [QuickDBD](https://app.quickdatabasediagrams.com/)_

## Sample Analytical Queries


#### Project Files
* _etl.py_ - The main script that runs the ETL Pipeline from S3 to Redshift.
* _setup_redshift.py_ - A script that sets up the required AWS resources
 including IAM role, permissions, Redshift cluster and DB.
* _cleanup_redshift.py_ - A script that removes up created AWS resources
 including IAM role, permissions, Redshift cluster and DB.
* _create_tables.py_ - Creates the tables on Redshift DB.
* _sql_queries.py_ - Queries specified by the Sparkify Analytics team.
* _dwh_config.yaml_ - Configuration file defining constants related to AWS
 resources.

## Dataset
#### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). 
Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist
of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each
song's track ID. 

For example:
```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

#### Log Dataset 
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by an [event
 simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the
dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music
streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files are partitioned by year and month, for example:
```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

#### Data Source - The Million Song Dataset
Thierry Bertin-Mahieux, Daniel P.W. Ellis, Brian Whitman, and Paul Lamere.
[The Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). In Proceedings of 
the 12th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference
 (ISMIR 2011), 2011.

Commit message:

Add Jupyter Notebook Dashboard & Fix staging_songs title import bug

README.md, after:

# sparkify-redshift-etl 
## Project Overview
This is the third project in the 
[Udacity Data Engineer Nanodegree](https://www.udacity.com/course/data-engineer-nanodegree--nd027).

The virtual startup 'Sparkify' provides a music streaming service. In this
 project we imagine that Sparkify has grown and we are shifting to using cloud 
 services for our data warehousing needs. 

Here we create an ETL pipeline that extracts JSON log data of user activity
 & song metadata from s3 buckets and stage them on Redshift, transforming the data
into a star-schema to optimize queries that have been specified by the analytics team. 

We also support Sparkify's IaC scalability goals by automating the ETL pipeline
infrastructure management using the 
[AWS Python SDK (Boto3)](https://boto3.amazonaws.com/v1/documentation/api/latest/index.html).

## How to Run
1. Clone this repository and install the requirements.
```
$ pip3 install -r requirements.txt
```

2. You will need an AWS user with rights to create IAM roles and Redshift
 clusters. Export your AWS Account credentials as environment variables in
 your terminal window:

```
$ export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<YOUR_AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID>
$ export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<YOUR_AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID>
```

3. **OPTIONAL:** Run the Redshift setup script to create the necessary IAM 
role, permissions, Redshift cluster if you do not already have those set up
. You can adjust the configuration details (e.g. AWS region, DB credentials) by
 editing `dwh_config.json` before running the setup script. 
 
```
$ python3 setup_redshift.py
```

4. Run the ETL scripts to load the data into the Redshift Cluster
```
python3 create_tables.py
python3 etl.py
```

5. **RECOMMENDED:** Run the teardown script to clean up your AWS resources.
```
$ python3 cleanup_redshift.py
```

## DB Schema Design
The data is loaded into a star-schema DB optimized on queries related to
songplays in the app. As they are small, each of the dimension tables is
distributed equally across each of the redshift nodes to optimize joins on
the fact table, `songplays`. 

![Sparkify DB Schema](images/sparkify_db.png?raw=true "Sparkify DB Schema")
_Image created with [QuickDBD](https://app.quickdatabasediagrams.com/)_

## Sample Analytical Queries
The `dashboard.ipynb` Juptyer Notebook contains some sample analytical
queries that demonstrate potential use-cases for this DB, as well as some
graphs of the data/tables.


## Project Files
* _etl.py_ - The main script that runs the ETL Pipeline from S3 to Redshift.
* _setup_redshift.py_ - A script that sets up the required AWS resources
 including IAM role, permissions, Redshift cluster and DB.
* _cleanup_redshift.py_ - A script that removes up created AWS resources
 including IAM role, permissions, Redshift cluster and DB.
* _create_tables.py_ - Creates the tables on Redshift DB.
* _sql_queries.py_ - Queries specified by the Sparkify Analytics team.
* _dwh_config.json_ - Configuration file defining constants related to AWS
 resources.
* _dashboard.ipynb_ - Some graphs of the DB plus some sample analytical queries.

## Datasets
#### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). 
Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist
of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each
song's track ID. 

For example:
```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

#### Log Dataset 
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by an [event
 simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the
dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music
streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files are partitioned by year and month, for example:
```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

#### Data Source - The Million Song Dataset
Thierry Bertin-Mahieux, Daniel P.W. Ellis, Brian Whitman, and Paul Lamere.
[The Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). In Proceedings of 
the 12th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference
 (ISMIR 2011), 2011.
